[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The first, you have to be
alone by pulling back from
people.
Finally, the game is to be with
people, yet always be alone.
Now, how many of you take
the feeling of aloneness
and feel it as pathology?
Have you ever thought
of flipping it around,
just that little flip?
There's an incredible
lie about the nature
of, the potential
of, relationship--
this beautiful quote
from the "I Ching."
"The Master said, life
leads the thoughtful person
on a path of many windings.
Now the course is checked.
Now it runs straight again.
Here, winged thoughts may
pour freely forth in words,
but there, the heavy
burden of knowledge
must be shut away in silence.
But when two people are at
one in their inmost hearts,
they shatter even the
strength of iron or of bronze.
And when two people
understand each other
in their inmost
hearts, their words
are sweet and strong, like
the fragrance of orchids."
Now, we're talking about
souls hanging out together,
souls who don't need
anything from each other.
They both are just
watching the unfolding.
The unfolding, on
the ego level, may
involve their
interaction, the roles
through which they interact.
But the souls are
just sharing a delight
in the unfolding of the dance.
At certain stages in the
journey, if you have a choice,
it's wonderful to have
other beings around you--
sometimes called a
Satsang or the Sangha,
a community of other
beings that recognize
what the journey
or the curriculum
is about that we are born into.
And they help you.
We help each other.
And it's a very
precious thing, to have
other people you meet and know
that are journeying on the path
together.
And it's interesting to
examine the contracts we
make with fellow human
beings, because most
of the relationships
we enter into
are at the ego level,
in which I am somebody
and I enter into a contract
with you as somebody.
And usually, the
nature of the contract
is I won't bug your somebodiness
if you don't bug mine.
I'll allow you to
be who you think
you are if you'll allow
me to be who I think I am.
The difference is that when
you meet with Satsang, you say,
I am trapped in
thinking I'm somebody.
You are trapped.
Could we help each
other get free?
Now, the peculiar
circumstance is
when you make that
contract with somebody
and they come up and
say, you're trapped.
Wake up.
You say, you're trapped!
What do you know about it?
Because when somebody is
trapped, they are trapped,
meaning they think it's real.
And in their reality,
your criticism
is seen as a criticism,
not as a helpful hint.
So if you're going to enter
into the relation of Sangha
or Satsang with that
somebody, you've
got to realize that truth is
a little scary to live with.
It's much better to live
with truth, however,
than with the kind of numbing
deception of all of us making
believe a reality is real.
I mean, when you
look at the violence
that consistency has done to
your truth, it's staggering.
How do you train
your awareness so
that it doesn't get
trapped in one plane
and then cut off your
access to the other planes?
That's what the issue is.
And you begin to see how
your definitions of yourself
keep trapping you, let alone
the projections that you
have to other people, let
alone their projections on you.
So you and I live in a
sea of projective systems,
some of which are coming out of
our own desires, needs, fears,
attractions, aversions,
preferences, prejudices,
opinions, and some of which are
coming from everybody else's.
See, the predicament
is as you awake
and you realize you have
been the perpetrator
of the conspiracy
you got caught in.
You're it.
You are it.
We are it.
We are the conspiracy.
And the interesting
question is, when
you extricate your
awareness from being
part of the conspiracy,
what happens?
If you're just doing it in
a half-baked way at first,
you're busy telling
everybody you've
gotten free of the conspiracy.
And then they usually
imprison you somewhere,
because you don't get
free of the conspiracy.
But a mature person
isn't in the conspiracy
and is not in the
conspiracy even to the point
of putting down the conspiracy.
They're just not
in the conspiracy.
They are living in a
different universe.
And therefore,
their being is free
of that conceptual
homogeneous field.
And that freedom
is what they offer
to another human
being that frees them,
and to see the maturity
of being able to extricate
your awareness from
entrapment in role--
without violence-- and
fulfilling the roles
at the same time, but fulfilling
them from a different place.